---
layout: post
title: Top 10 things I did after installing Ubuntu 12.04 LTS alongside Windows7
date: 2013-01-18
categories: [Linux]
hidden: true # likely outdated and no more relevant, so hide from blog page
---

I installed Ubuntu on my computer a few years ago, and then… I installed it again 🙂

I like to have both Ubuntu and Windows on my system (Dual boot). Here is the list of things I usually do to setup Ubuntu, on a computer which already has a Windows OS :-

1. While logged in Windows, create disk space for Ubuntu using [EaseUs partition Manager](http://www.partition-tool.com/download.htm) (anywhere between 25-40GB of disk space should be good). The free space will be shown as unallocated space.

1. Create a [bootable USB stick](http://www.ubuntu.com/download/help/create-a-usb-stick-on-windows) for the version on Ubuntu which you want to install. Boot from it  (restart windows and hit ESC or F12 to select USB as your boot device) and select “Install beside Windows7”. (it will automatically detect the unallocated space you had created)

1. Now run the following commands from terminal (launch terminal using ctrl+alt+t):
```shell
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade
```
This updates the Ubuntu repositories.
```shell
sudo apt-get install vim
```
This installs Vim text editor (extremely powerful tool to use while coding)
```shell
sudo add-apt-repository "deb http://archive.canonical.com/ $(lsb_release -sc) partner"
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install skype
```
This installs Skype
```shell
sudo apt-get install p7zip-full
```
This installs 7zip (compression/uncompression tool)
```shell
sudo apt-get install gparted
```
The gparted partition tool
```shell
sudo apt-get install ubuntu-restricted-extras
```
This allows Ubuntu to play file formats like mp3, avi, etc.
```shell
sudo apt-get install lo-menubar
```
This gives global menu for Libre office
```shell
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:diesch/testing
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install unsettings
```
An application to tweak the Ubuntu 12.04 which has Reset to Default option.
```shell
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:ubuntu-wine/ppa
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install wine1.4
sudo apt-get install winetricks
```
This installs Wine 1.4 (stable) which allows you to use windows applications.
```shell
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:mozillateam/thunderbird-stable
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install thunderbird
```
Install the Mozilla Thunderbird email client
```shell
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:yannubuntu/boot-repair
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y boot-repair
```
This installs boot-repair, a handy tool to fix any bootloader problems
```shell
sudo apt-get install gedit-plugins
```
Now you may launch gedit and go to → edit → preferences → plugins → now select the plugins as per your requirement.
```shell
sudo apt-get install openjdk-7-jdk icedtea-7-plugin
```
JDK is needed for applications requiring Java support
```shell
sudo apt-get install nautilus-open-terminal
nautilus -q && sleep 1 && nautilus -n
```
This installs the nautilus open in terminal feature, which you’ll find useful once you start frequently using Ubuntu.
If using a laptop:
```shell
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:webupd8team/jupiter
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install jupiter
```
Install Jupiter, the power management client which can help enhance your battery life!
```shell
sudo apt-get install powertop
```
Another utility for power management, launch after install using
```shell
sudo powertop
```
Then use arrow keys to move to the tunable tab and use ENTER key to adjust parameters to good, then exit using ESC.

1. Launch the Ubuntu Software Center from Unity Dash and search and install the following: GIMP Image Editor, VLC media player, Synaptic Package Manager, Wine, Okular (similar to Foxit pdf reader for windows, allows comments and highlighting), redshift.

1. Launch firefox and search and install (using double click) [Google chrome](https://www.google.com/intl/en/chrome/browser/) since Flash is not supported in firefox.

1. Re-enable hibernate using following commands (note that your swap memory should be equal to RAM):
```shell
sudoedit /etc/polkit-1/localauthority/50-local.d/com.ubuntu.enable-hibernate.pkla
```
Right click and paste the following in the file opened:
```shell
[Re-enable hibernate by default]
Identity=unix-user:*
Action=org.freedesktop.upower.hibernate
ResultActive=yes
```
Hit ESC to go into command mode and then type :wq to save and quit. Restart your computer and you should see Hibernate as one of the options.

1. Open your Home folder and then do → view → status bar

1. Modify privacy under system settings, then change Icon size and wallpaper under appearance.

1. Under System Settings select Keyboard → Shortcuts → custom shortcuts → +
Name: Kill Processes     Command: gnome-system-monitor
Click apply. Now click on disabled and then ctrl + alt + k . This is your shortcut to launch the system monitor.

10. (For Acer aspire 5738z) In your chrome browser go to [https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AspireTimeline/Fixes](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AspireTimeline/Fixes) and apply Touchpad On/Off fix given for 9.10. Then add acpi_backlight=vendor after splash to enable brightness control, change timeout, save and do sudo update-grub.

[Advanced] For displaying only current directory in terminal and not the entire path:
```shell
vim ~/.bashrc
```
Find the lines
```shell
else
    PS1='${debian_chroot:+($debian_chroot)}\u@\h:\w\$ '
fi
```
and change the w to W.

If you are installing Ubuntu as a VM and need to share folders then [this is a good link](http://ubuntuexperiment.wordpress.com/2008/11/12/sharing-folders-between-host-and-guest-os-in-virtualbox/) to refer. Also install guest utils using before attempting to mount.

sudo apt-get install virtualbox-ose-guest-utils

P.S: Some information drawn from [techdrivein](http://www.techdrivein.com/2012/06/25-things-i-did-after-installing-ubuntu.html) and [noobslab](http://www.noobslab.com/2012/04/important-things-to-do-after-install_26.html)
